Date: 01 May 2019
To: Doug Dederman, manager Org 5421, Sandia
From: Chad Hovey
Re: Panther Project scope creep, V&V elimination, and quality trade offs

--

On Tuesday, 30 April 2019, Panther project team members met to discuss
progress and scope of work toward "Paper 1".

Team members present were 
* Christian Franck, head principal investigator for the Panther project, U Wisconsin Madison
* Chad Hovey, principal investigator for the head impact simulations, Sandia,
* Ron Szalkowski, principal investigator for the helmet testing, Team Wendy Inc.
* Alice Lux, Panther program manager, Brown University
* Sushant Malave, Team Wendy Inc.

Paper 1 is the first of what is hoped to be a series of two or three
total journal publications stemming from the Panther project work.

In this meeting, Christian recommended a change in scope of Paper 1, from
a translation-only study to a study that included both translations and rotations.
The rationale from Christian was this change would result in a "more
impactful paper."

Prior to this meeting, the scope of Paper 1 was to include only translations.
Then, planned Paper 2 was to investigate rotations.  

The translation study is a simulation of a drop test experiment of the DOT 
head form in a Team Wendy helmet with an impact speed of 10 fps onto a 
steel hemispherical target ("mil spec").  

The rotation study is a simulation of the same translational drop test, 
described above, but onto an inclined, flat steel target, angled at 45
degrees above horizontal.  The incline causes the impacting object to not
only rebound, but also rotate, after impact.  

Rotations to the head are of particular interest because the brain deforms 
more readily in shear than in volumetric compression.  

Scope Creep
-----------

From Christian's point of view, there is no scope creep.  Rather, the 
specification for the original Paper 1 and Paper 2 have now just merged
into a single Paper 1 deliverable.  

From Chad's point of view, there is implicit scope creep because the 
risk profile has changed.  Specifically, the translation-only case is
relatively low risk compared to the rotation case because the former
has significantly less complexity to simulate.  

The translation case is essentially a sophisticated series of springs 
and dash pots.  

The rotation case has two sliding interfaces: the interface between the 
exterior of the helmet and the steel target, and the interface between
the helmet pads and the skin of the human head.  

The risk profile of having two separated deliverables is low because the 
risk of failing to accurately simulate the translation case is low, whereas 
the risk of failing to simulate the rotation case is relatively higher.  
Failure of the latter does not jeopardize the former, since they are uncoupled.  

The risk profile of having two conjoined deliverables is higher because there 
is no incremental success milestone of a translation-only case.  The result 
is "all or none."  

Recommendation: revert to the original plan of Paper 1 as a translation-only 
study, followed by Paper 2 as a rotation study adjunct, if time and money 
allow for Paper 2 to be completed.

V&V Elimination
---------------

Chad and Ryan have maintained a strategy of 
* verify a part (as known as a component),
* two or more parts compose an assembly (also known as a system), then
* verify the assembly.

Christian has tacitly asked that the component verification be 
eliminated or significantly reduced to allow for more time to be spent
on the system.  

Specifically, Chad and Ryan have been building tools to objectively and
repeatably evaluate the simulation's ability to reproduce experimentally
derived responses of a DOT head form, dropped at 10 fps, onto a MEP (soft
rubber) target.  

The acceleration versus time responses from 20 experiments were processed
to create a single experimental curve with a known mean and standard 
deviation response.  

The acceleration versus time response from a single simulation is then 
compared to the mean experimental response.  The non-normalized cross-correlation
is used to adjust from time lag between the experiment and simulation.  
Then the error rate of the L2-norm of the difference between the mean
experimental and simulation response is calculated as an objective and 
repeatable method to judge similarity between experiment and simulation.

Prior to yesterday's meeting, the plan was then to use the cross-correlation
L2-norm (CCL2) error rate to guide a two-parameter convex optimization, to
search for the elastic modulus ("E"), and Poisson ratio ("nu"), in a 
two-parameter finite elasticity stress response function.  The result of this
optimization would not only guide the simulation material property inputs 
to the best match with experimental results, it would also provide an
objective measure of the degree to which the simulation can reproduce
experimental results.  

Christian understands this approach and agrees it is very rigorous.  However, 
Christian tacitly believes this rigor is taking too long, at the risk
of not reaching the finish line of a system simulation (Bob in a helmeted
impact onto a steel target).  

Christian notes that the MEP target is not part of the mil spec, and it is
used strictly in non-helmeted impact tests to provide cushion to the 
experimental instrumentation.  MEP is used when helmets are not used in tests.
When helmets are used in tests, a steel hemispherical target is used instead
of a softer MEP target.  A non-helmeted impact onto a steel target would 
be too severe of an impact for instruments, and be too far afield from the
helmeted impact response curves.

Chad notes that correctly simulating the MEP target impact is an incremental
milestone that demonstrates validity of the simulation framework.  
Moreover, the MEP, as a cushion to the system, is much less sophisticated and
thus much easier to model, compared to the helmet foam pads.  The response
of the MEP pad is largely elastic.  The response of the helmet padding is
viscoelastic and strain-rate dependent.

At the TBI conference at the University of Texas at Arlington in April 2009, 
Christian commented to Chad that the CCL2 verification approach was 
interesting but not necessary for the Panther project.  Christian recommended
that if Chad were to "match the peaks" of the acceleration versus time
curves for the simulation to the experiment, that this quicker approach would
be sufficient for the purposes of the Panther project. 

Quality Trade Offs
------------------

At issue is cost, scope, and quality, and how to balance these three
competing issues.  The classical business paradigm of 
	"Good, cheap, fast; choose any two."
is active here.  

Chad's research strategy has been to emphasize the "good" category.

Christian's objection is that such high quality is too slow and too expensive.  
Christian also worries that such a strategy will result in a high quality
component, at the cost of failing to deliver a system.

Chad's objection is that making large deliverables (e.g., translation 
plus rotation) on time and on budget (but with lesser quality) is more 
harmful than making incremental deliverables (translation, then rotation) 
on time and on budget with (with higher quality).


